The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject to this show is science fiction music, including that of science fiction motion
pictures and other sources.
The importance of music to movies, I think, is an obvious thing. A good musical score
can do a number of things for a movie. It can create a mood for the entire picture. It
can dramatize the actions of a particular scene. It can also rouse the emotions of the
audience.
With science fiction movies, I think this is true also, but with another dimension to
it, the situations and moods of a science fiction movie might be of a very different
nature. You might have, for instance, a meeting with a race of aliens, the awesomeness of
a space battle, the discovery of a new planet, situations or moods that might take something
a little different, a little special. I think it requires a special breed of composer to
accomplish this.
But the best science fiction music, I think, can evoke what good science fiction itself
evokes, the sense of wonder and excitement.
That was the main theme from Star Wars. Much of the music used in science fiction movies
has its roots in classical music.
One of the more popular and well-known works of this type is the Suite for Large Orchestra
by Gustav Holst called The Planets. It was written between 1914 and 1918, and it contains
a series of pieces on each planet that was known at that time, Mars through Neptune,
and gives a musical impression of each one.
During the filming of Star Wars, they used the music from Holst's The Planets to use
as background music behind the scenes while they were being roughly edited together. They
used this music in order to give the director and crew a sense of what the music was going
to be like when the picture was completed. They liked the music so much that when they
had the original score written, they had it written with the same type of orchestration
and theme that was in The Planets.
As an example now of what this is like, and maybe you can compare it to what the Star Wars
theme was like, let's listen to Mars, the bringer of war, from Gustav Holst's The Planets.
This is Bernard Ehrman conducting the London Philharmonic Orchestra.
Holst treated The Planets not in their astronomical aspect so much as in their astrological. Now
the astrology isn't to be taken seriously. The titles would only indicate moods. They're
more like tone poems that evoke particular moods. For instance, Mars, the bringer of
war, evokes the mechanized horrors of modern warfare, since in its astrological aspect
Mars is the god of war.
Indeed as Harry Halbrach said, the planets belongs to our time as genuine space music.
And of course who can forget the unique blend of classical music with science fiction and
probably one of the greatest science fiction movies of all time, 2001.
Just as in Star Wars, the people producing 2001 used classical music behind their movies
as they were editing it together. The difference here is being that they liked the music so
much that they used it in the movie.
And what they had to do was to junk an entire score that had been composed by Alex North.
And it was not used in the movie because this classical background was so successful.
The piece you just heard, which is probably the most famous theme from the movie 2001,
is an actuality, a piece from a classical composition called Also Sprachsara Thustra,
written by Richard Strauss in 1896. It's from a long tone poem. This is just the fanfare
from that piece. Another piece used in the film was written by Richard's father, Johann,
and it is one of the most famous of the Viennese waltzes, the Blue Danube, used in the incredible
and unforgettable scene of the rocket ship approaching the space station in Earth orbit.
As the 1950s began, we were treated to a number of low-budget science fiction films. One of
them in particular, Rocket Ship XM, had music by a rather well-known classical composer,
Fridae Groffet, the composer of the Grand Canyon Suite.
Groffet was noted for his suites. He wrote many of them. His musical method was very simple.
If you want to evoke the sound of a gun, you would fire a gun, which he did in one of his
compositions. If you wanted the sound of a fire engine, you would record a fire engine. So his
music is full of old typewriters clacking, earthquakes going off, foghorns bellowing,
cable car bells ringing. That kind of simple basic method is particularly appropriate for
the dramatic science fiction movie, which Rocket Ship XM was.
In 1950, producer Robert Lippert decided to approach Groffet and try to get him to compose
the music for the film. Groffet did not particularly want to be involved with low-budget science
fiction films, which were not exactly considered the best by critics at that time. He agreed only
to write the basic themes for the music. The actual composition of the orchestration was
done by Albert Glasser. The following is a sampling of some of the pieces from Rocket Ship XM,
including a solo by a unique instrument, the theremin.
Rocket Ship XM is available on Starlog Records from Starlog Magazine.
One of the most famous of the early Hollywood film composers is Bernard Ehrman. Ehrman is
richly versed in classical music and his themes reflect that. He's mostly noted for his scores
to Hitchcock movies such as North by Northwest and Psycho. We're going to play two selections written
and conducted by Ehrman, journey to the center of the earth and the seventh voyage of Sinbad.
One of the most noteworthy movies from the 50s was Forbidden Planet by Metro Goldenmayer.
The music for that was extremely original. It was Electronic Tonalities composed by Lewis and
Baby Barron. Electronic music was in its infancy and synthesizers had not even been invented.
This is a brief excerpt from part of the soundtrack.
Any contemporary moviegoer and anyone who has ears to hear is familiar with the work of John Williams.
The composer's competence is attested to by the fact that he was recently made the conductor of
the Boston Pops Orchestra, replacing Arthur Fiedler. He's done movies such as Jaws, Star Wars,
Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Superman, The Empire Strikes Back.
We'll start with the with the haunting Princess Leia's theme from Star Wars.
The
same year that Star Wars was completed, John Williams was also working on another movie.
It was Close Encounters of the Third Kind. Actually, John wrote the music before the
movie was completed and some of the scenes in the movie were matched to the music, which is usually
the other way around. This is some of the most incredible music that John Williams has written.
I don't think anything evokes the sense of wonder quite as much as when the
first visitors appear to the earth people.
Williams next did the music for the movie Superman. It was interesting in that movie he had the
characters were identified by a particular mood, a particular kind of musical composition which
identified their character. Lois Lane, for instance, was identified with a romantic ballad.
Otis, the bumbling helper, had a comic flatulent march theme for a bassoon.
Jor-El on the planet Krypton had a music which evoked a sense of mystic benevolence.
But probably the best known compositions from the movie was the Fanfare, one of the
heroic themes identified with Superman.
We'll also play a short excerpt from the famous flying scene.
John Williams, of course, also composed the score for the sequel to Star Wars, The Empire Strikes Back.
Another recent science fiction motion picture released in 1979 was Star Trek,
the motion picture with music by Jerry Goldsmith. The film score was nominated for Academy Award
and was well deserving of that and here is a selection from it called The Klingon Battle.
Many of the most noted soundtracks released lately have been from science fiction movies and I believe
that we can look forward to seeing much the same in the future.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCV FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.